docs/source/notes/colabs.rst, before:

Colab Notebooks and Video Tutorials
===================================

We have prepared a list of colab notebooks that practically introduces you to the world of **Graph Neural Networks** with **PyG**:

1. `Introduction: Hands-on Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1h3-vJGRVloF5zStxL5I0rSy4ZUPNsjy8?usp=sharing>`__
2. `Node Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14OvFnAXggxB8vM4e8vSURUp1TaKnovzX?usp=sharing>`__
3. `Graph Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1I8a0DfQ3fI7Njc62__mVXUlcAleUclnb?usp=sharing>`__
4. `Scaling Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1XAjcjRHrSR_ypCk_feIWFbcBKyT4Lirs?usp=sharing>`__
5. `Point Cloud Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1D45E5bUK3gQ40YpZo65ozs7hg5l-eo_U?usp=sharing>`__
6. `Explaining GNN Model Predictions using Captum <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1fLJbFPz0yMCQg81DdCP5I8jXw9LoggKO?usp=sharing>`__
7. `Customizing Aggregations within Message Passing <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KKw-VUDQuHhMo7sCd7ZaRROza3leBjRR?usp=sharing>`__

**Stanford CS224W Graph ML Tutorials:**

.. image:: https://data.pyg.org/img/cs224w_tutorials.png
  :align: center
  :width: 941px
  :target: https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w

The `Stanford CS224W <http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224w/>`__ course has collected a set of `graph machine learning tutorial blog posts <https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w>`__, fully realized with **PyG**.
Students worked on projects spanning all kinds of tasks, model architectures and applications.
All tutorials also link to a Google Colab with the code in the tutorial for you to follow along with as you read it!

**PyTorch Geometric Tutorial Project:**

The `PyTorch Geometric Tutorial <https://github.com/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial>`__ project provides **video tutorials and Colab notebooks** for a variety of different methods in **PyG**:

1. Introduction [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JtDgmmQ60x8>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial1/Tutorial1.ipynb>`__]
2. PyTorch basics [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHrhp2l_knU>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial2/Tutorial2.ipynb>`__]
3. Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CwsPoa7z2c8>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial3/Tutorial3.ipynb>`__]
4. Spectral Graph Convolutional Layers [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ghw-fp_2HFM>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial4/Tutorial4.ipynb>`__]
5. Aggregation Functions in GNNs [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGXovxQ7hKU>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial5/Aggregation%20Tutorial.ipynb>`__]
6. (Variational) Graph Autoencoders (GAE and VGAE) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qA6U4nIK62E>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial6/Tutorial6.ipynb>`__]
7. Adversarially Regularized Graph Autoencoders (ARGA and ARGVA) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZkLu2OaHD0>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial7/Tutorial7.ipynb>`__]
8. Graph Generation [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=embpBq1gHAE>`__]
9. Recurrent Graph Neural Networks [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v7TQ2DUoaBY>`__, `Notebook (Part 1) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial9/Tutorial9.ipynb>`__, `Notebook (Part 2) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial9/RecGNN_tutorial.ipynb>`__]
10. DeepWalk and Node2Vec [`Video (Theory) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QZQBnl1QbCQ>`__, `Video (Practice) <https://youtu.be/5YOcpI3dB7I>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial11/Tutorial11.ipynb>`__]
11. Edge analysis [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1G7oS9hmwE>`__, `Notebook (Link Prediction) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial12/Tutorial12%20GAE%20for%20link%20prediction.ipynb>`__, `Notebook (Label Prediction) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial12/Tutorial12%20Node2Vec%20for%20label%20prediction.ipynb>`__]
12. Data handling in PyG (Part 1) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vz5bT8Xw6Dc>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial14/Tutorial14.ipynb>`__]
13. Data handling in PyG (Part 2) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5T-JdyVCfs>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial15/Tutorial15.ipynb>`__]
14. MetaPath2vec [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtPoGehuKYY>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial13/Tutorial13.ipynb>`__]
15. Graph pooling (DiffPool) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uqc3O3-oXxM>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial16/Tutorial16.ipynb>`__]

Commit message:

Adding W&B instrumented Colab for node classification (#5192)
* Adding W&B Instrumented Colab for Node Classification

* adding change to changelog.md

* updating notebook url for wandb example

Co-authored-by: Matthias Fey <matthias.fey@tu-dortmund.de>

docs/source/notes/colabs.rst, after:

Colab Notebooks and Video Tutorials
===================================

We have prepared a list of colab notebooks that practically introduces you to the world of **Graph Neural Networks** with **PyG**:

1. `Introduction: Hands-on Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1h3-vJGRVloF5zStxL5I0rSy4ZUPNsjy8?usp=sharing>`__
2. `Node Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14OvFnAXggxB8vM4e8vSURUp1TaKnovzX?usp=sharing>`__
3. `Graph Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1I8a0DfQ3fI7Njc62__mVXUlcAleUclnb?usp=sharing>`__
4. `Scaling Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1XAjcjRHrSR_ypCk_feIWFbcBKyT4Lirs?usp=sharing>`__
5. `Point Cloud Classification with Graph Neural Networks <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1D45E5bUK3gQ40YpZo65ozs7hg5l-eo_U?usp=sharing>`__
6. `Explaining GNN Model Predictions using Captum <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1fLJbFPz0yMCQg81DdCP5I8jXw9LoggKO?usp=sharing>`__
7. `Customizing Aggregations within Message Passing <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KKw-VUDQuHhMo7sCd7ZaRROza3leBjRR?usp=sharing>`__
8. `Node Classification with Graph Neural Networks Instrumented with Weights and Biases Logging and Sweeps <https://colab.research.google.com/github/wandb/examples/blob/master/colabs/pyg/8_Node_Classification_(with_W&B).ipynb>`__

**Stanford CS224W Graph ML Tutorials:**

.. image:: https://data.pyg.org/img/cs224w_tutorials.png
  :align: center
  :width: 941px
  :target: https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w

The `Stanford CS224W <http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224w/>`__ course has collected a set of `graph machine learning tutorial blog posts <https://medium.com/stanford-cs224w>`__, fully realized with **PyG**.
Students worked on projects spanning all kinds of tasks, model architectures and applications.
All tutorials also link to a Google Colab with the code in the tutorial for you to follow along with as you read it!

**PyTorch Geometric Tutorial Project:**

The `PyTorch Geometric Tutorial <https://github.com/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial>`__ project provides **video tutorials and Colab notebooks** for a variety of different methods in **PyG**:

1. Introduction [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JtDgmmQ60x8>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial1/Tutorial1.ipynb>`__]
2. PyTorch basics [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHrhp2l_knU>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial2/Tutorial2.ipynb>`__]
3. Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CwsPoa7z2c8>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial3/Tutorial3.ipynb>`__]
4. Spectral Graph Convolutional Layers [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ghw-fp_2HFM>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial4/Tutorial4.ipynb>`__]
5. Aggregation Functions in GNNs [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGXovxQ7hKU>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial5/Aggregation%20Tutorial.ipynb>`__]
6. (Variational) Graph Autoencoders (GAE and VGAE) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qA6U4nIK62E>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial6/Tutorial6.ipynb>`__]
7. Adversarially Regularized Graph Autoencoders (ARGA and ARGVA) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZkLu2OaHD0>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial7/Tutorial7.ipynb>`__]
8. Graph Generation [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=embpBq1gHAE>`__]
9. Recurrent Graph Neural Networks [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v7TQ2DUoaBY>`__, `Notebook (Part 1) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial9/Tutorial9.ipynb>`__, `Notebook (Part 2) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial9/RecGNN_tutorial.ipynb>`__]
10. DeepWalk and Node2Vec [`Video (Theory) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QZQBnl1QbCQ>`__, `Video (Practice) <https://youtu.be/5YOcpI3dB7I>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial11/Tutorial11.ipynb>`__]
11. Edge analysis [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1G7oS9hmwE>`__, `Notebook (Link Prediction) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial12/Tutorial12%20GAE%20for%20link%20prediction.ipynb>`__, `Notebook (Label Prediction) <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial12/Tutorial12%20Node2Vec%20for%20label%20prediction.ipynb>`__]
12. Data handling in PyG (Part 1) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vz5bT8Xw6Dc>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial14/Tutorial14.ipynb>`__]
13. Data handling in PyG (Part 2) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q5T-JdyVCfs>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial15/Tutorial15.ipynb>`__]
14. MetaPath2vec [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtPoGehuKYY>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial13/Tutorial13.ipynb>`__]
15. Graph pooling (DiffPool) [`Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uqc3O3-oXxM>`__, `Notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/AntonioLonga/PytorchGeometricTutorial/blob/main/Tutorial16/Tutorial16.ipynb>`__]
